---
layout: post
title: The Only Language Learning App You Want to Use
date:   2025-03-26
categories: [language learning, learning]
tags: [language, language learning, app]
description: Why am I using LingQ?
---

Disclaimer:

I do not work for LingQ and I don't get paid to publish this post. I made this post only for sharing useful information regarding learning languages.
I started using LingQ since around 9 months ago and saw the tangible impacts this service has made on my language learning journey. That is why I want
to spread the words, hopefully, this helps your language learning journey as well.


## What is LingQ?

[**LingQ**][1] is a language learning platform for everyone. It currently offers roughly 30 'popular' languages, and many more are coming (now in *Beta* mode) in the future.
You can access it via the Web interface, or, by using its mobile app, which is available via **Google Play** and **Apple Store**. One of the founders of LingQ is Steve Kaufmann.
He is a famous ployglot teaching people how to learn languages [on YouTube][lingosteve].

You can use the service/app for free but then the functionalities are quite limited. Check out its pricing options at [this page][price] and decide for yourself.


## Why am I using it?

Around one and a half years ago, I started learning Dutch seriously by myself. I've tried consuming all kinds of language learning contents. At first,
I spent a lot of time listening to Dutch contents, including podcasts, YouTube videos, online courses, Dutch TV programs, etc. Then I started reading
as well. The reading materials were local newspaper and kid's books at the beginning, and, later with books (for adults) that interest me.

According to my exprience, effective language learning happens when I am exposed to lots of contents (inputs) in the target language. Contents that have meaningful
contexts. Good quality, interesting contents keep you motivated.

*Reading* and *listening* materials are the language inputs I have easy access to. But to find high quality contents that match your language level and interests needs
a bit of searching and patience. In addition, for the listening materials, I also found that, at least at the beginner to early intermediate level, I need **transcripts**
or texts from the contents I listen to to be able to pick up vocabularies more quickly and effectively. I also need a systematic way of **keeping track** of all the
vocabularies I have learned so far and reviewing them from time to time.

As mentioned, I consumed a lot of learning materials on YouTube. One day, I came across the contents from Steve and learned about his LingQ app. I liked how Steve approached
language learning: both the mentality and the methodology are rather motivating for language learners like me. That is why I got curious about the LingQ app. However, I used
other language learning Apps before, including [`Duolingo`][duolingo]. With Duolingo, I felt I couldn't progress much further after I had reached some basic language proficiency
in a target language, therefore, I was also skeptical about the effectiveness of LingQ at first.

Even so, I decided to try the free version anyway and see how it goes. In the free version, it already offered me lots of interesting audio contents with (auto-generated)
transcripts. In the app, it introduced many more Dutch language content sources/creators to me that I otherwise would not know. In addition, the audio contents are categorized
under different subjects, for example, history, entertainment, culture, travel, technology, health, news, etc. This helps me expose myself to vocabularies in different areas
that I normally would not touch.

Moreover, one feature I liked a lot in the free version is that it lets you import audio/video contents you're interested in from many different sources. That means
I could import YouTube videos into LingQ and use LingQ to manage all the contents that I have learned before. However, the free version only allows limited number of imports
(like, only 20?). Anyhow, I also got a sneak peek into the features like **quizzes** and **saving words and phrases for review** which are part of the built-in '[**Spaced
Repetition Software**][srs]'.

All in all, I had good impression about LingQ because it seemed tailor-made to my needs. Subsequently, I purchased the premium version.

Now, let me elaborate more about the (premium) App features stand out for me:


## The Features I Found Useful

- Improves your listening skills by listening to all sorts of imported contents; LingQ helps you to 'find' interesting contents easily; you can import YouTube, Netflix, Podcasts.
  And to me, that's already more than enough. Most contents are *reasonably long* enough and with *good quality*.
- As I mentioned, you can have transcripts for those imported contents. For 'built-in' contents, they have transcripts to; this helps a lot when you're still in the intermediate
  level or below.
- In terms of speaking practice, I found **sentence view** very helpful. Because I can simply repeat/mimic how the native speaker speaks sentence by sentence. If you practice
  that consistently, you're speaking skills improve dramatically.
- Quizzes and SRS to help you remember
- It even lets you practice writing (you write something and someone will correct it for you)!
- Storing your vocabularies so that you know which words you've encountered / learned before and which are new.
TODO:


## Other Features
TODO


## Results After Using The App
TODO


[1]: https://www.lingq.com
[price]: https://www.lingq.com/en/signup/
[lingosteve]: https://www.youtube.com/@Thelinguist
[duolingo]: https://www.duolingo.com/
[srs]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaced_repetition
